- Shooter. shooter.
- Get 'em. get 'em. get 'em.
Who have I been
praying to all this time?
You were my shelter. my
quiet place in the chaos.
My respite. the
calm in my storm.
Your memory follows me
as constant as my shadow.
Your absence lingers.
but in every shadow.
I find your presence.
With each sun that sets.
a day less between us.
- All those things will do.
all those perfect pictures.
One day they'll
all be forgotten.
but today will make
them worthwhile.
So will you join me in a
story. written by you and me?
- How does this story end?
- I suppose you've
got a cook and a maid.
- Just a cook.
But there is a woman
that helps in a house.
And. oh and there is a boy.
- Pascal.
- Yes. Pascal. who
does the odd jobs.
- Pascal does
everybody's odd jobs.
- Yes. but we pay
him to do ours.
- You didn't even know his name.
- Adrien. stop it.
- You'll be saying he's
like one of the family next.
- Oh. Adrien.
Ow.
- Look at that.
- Do I look
like a princess?
- Mm. my Parisian queen.
- I have to go.
Some of us have work to do.
- Oh. I can help.
We've upset her.
- No we haven't.
She's just a pain in the neck.
- We still upset her.
- When are you
telling your parents?
telling your father?
Are you scared of him or what?
- No. of course not.
When he married my mother.
he doesn't have a
leg to stand on.
- Did she teach
you to be a poet?
- I'm pretty sure she didn't
want me to be a farmer.
- Is
everything all right?
Have you seen your brother?
- I don't know.
- You don't know?
- It looked like him.
it sounded like him.
but he wasn't acting like him.
- Is he with the girl?
- So. how does the story end?
- It ends with you realizing
why everything happened
the way it had to happen.
- Come on boy.
there's work to be done.
I think it's time you
were heading home.
- I'm sorry Mr.
Lambert. it's my fault.
- I doubt that.
Adrien.
- Don't go.
- It's all right.
Just stick it.
- Snitch.
- Lovesick idiot.
- Your infatuation
with the Lambert boy.
- Daddy. he makes me happy.
And when he talks to me
and when he looks at me.
he doesn't see
education or status.
He sees me and he loves me.
- Stop it.
- Oh. please don't cry.
If you've made a mistake.
if you've made promises
that you shouldn't have.
well we can fix it.
- Mamma. you don't understand.
He is worth it. he is.
- Is there something
that I should know?
- No. of course not.
- Since you start
talking like this.
I don't recognize you anymore.
- Harold.
- Nothing you do or say
is gonna make a difference
and you've got to find
a way to live with that.
- She is not the right woman.
She doesn't belong here.
- Just like my mother?
- Marrying her was the most
selfish thing I ever did.
- But we're in love.
- Your mother and
I were in love.
It wasn't enough.
- You don't know Louise.
- No. but I know what
living and working on a farm
does to a woman.
Being married to a man like
me. the man you'll become.
it wears them down
little by little.
You don't notice at first.
And then they're gone.
If you love her. you'll let
her go.
- I can't do that.
- You can.
- No.
I really can't.
- Do I have to
talk to her father?
I'm sure you're not the
son-in-law he imagined.
- Do what you like.
Makes no difference.
- Adrien.
Adrien.
- Excuse me. sir.
- Not now.
Do you have a minute. sir?
- Is it Laurentz?
- You ordered
Lieutenant Von Rauch
to take the Belgian prisoners.
to command a Steiner's camp.
- Mm.
- He executed them.
- We are at war.
- Not just the
prisoners. sir.
Men. women. children.
All of them because of
one franc-tireur.
a young girl barely
out of her teens.
- What is
this. a cozy little nightcap.
- You salute a senior
officer Lieutenant.
You're going out tonight
with a scouting party.
- Don't worry. this is my last.
- Did I not raise you
to be a gentleman?
- You did.
- In war and in
peace. it's a choice.
We can choose to
respect our enemies.
- What. let them
shoot us in the back?
- Or we can be
unnecessarily brutal.
- One of my men was killed today
and they almost had me too.
- They were trying to
protect what was theirs.
I understand
that you ordered your
men to shoot civilians.
- They were rabble-rousers.
- No. they were
women and children.
War has a code.
Your decisions. your
choices. your actions
are putting us in danger.
- I did what I had
to do to save lives
and I will do it again.
- This has got to stop boy.
before it goes too far.
- Too late for that.
- I didn't hear you.
- I said. what's
the point in that?
I'll be called up for the army
soon and then I'll be dead.
- Father. is it true
the Kaiser's coming?
- No. no. no. Camille.
not the Kaiser himself.
- Doctor.
- Louise.
- Leonard.
- I was wondering about
the doctor's new car.
- Oh yes.
Nice and shiny.
He has a barn big enough
to put his car in it.
and yet he chooses to park
it right here in the square.
In case of emergencies. he says.
I'd like to show you something.
- Now?
I have work to do.
- Sunday is a day
of rest. Leonard.
- For you maybe.
- Did you hear what
happened last night?
Gunfire. right on
the road to Brussels.
- Could have been
someone shooting rabbits.
- People are leaving
the villages.
- Well. yeah. the rich are.
The poor are being abandoned
to look after themselves.
- Where are they going?
- France. mostly.
- Why would anyone
leave their home?
- Because they're terrified.
We all are. can't you see?
- What are
we supposed to do
if the Germans turn up?
- Well. where I come from.
you resist. you fight back.
- With what?
Hunting rifle and a pitchfork?
- Or we could escape to France.
- Oh. you can do
that. but I can't.
I'm not leaving the farm.
- And what about the children?
- I'm not a child.
- That is right.
You're old enough to fight.
- But not old enough
to do what I want.
- He's young. Leonard.
- Can I have one?
- Girls don't smoke.
- This girl does.
- Bloody fools.
- I expect they've all been
through the same at their age.
They probably feel
sorry for you.
I feel sorry for you.
- I feel sorry for you.
It's the most wonderful
feeling in the world.
I feel invincible.
- You don't look it.
- What on
earth happened?
Where are the others?
- We're the
only survivors.
We walked straight
into a Belgian platoon. sir.
- What the
hell is going on?
- You were supposed
to be out there.
You were supposed
to be in charge.
Gather your men
we're moving out.
- We'll go after them.
They can't have gone far.
- What's this huh?
Too drunk to lead your men.
too drunk to do your job.
- Sergeant Schultz
is a capable soldier.
- 'Cause of your
arrogance and your self.
your self-indulgence.
we are now outnumbered.
Do you understand?
- There goes Leonard.
Visiting Father Michael.
- He's come to discuss
his tormented soul.
- It's about bloody time.
- Come.
Remember this?
- I'm hardly likely to forget.
- And when the Germans come.
this is gonna be the
safest place to hide.
- Why are you showing me this?
- The people trust you Leonard.
They're going to be looking
to you for leadership.
- They can look all they like.
I'm not leading anyone anywhere.
- Look. nobody else knows
that these are here.
- No surprise then.
How old are these?
When were they last cleaned?
- I don't know.
I don't know
anything about guns.
That's why I wanted to
show you where they are.
If it should come down to it.
- If it should
come down to what?
- Who else am I gonna ask?
The doctor?
The mayor and most of the parish
council have gone already.
There's no one left.
People are always
the last front.
And the people
respect you. Leonard.
even though you don't know it.
- I can't do this.
- Then who will?
- Hmm. you look good up there.
- Like a poet's wife?
- Like Mrs. Lambert.
- What?
You're getting married now?
A bit fast. isn't it?
- Don't tell Dad.
- What's it worth?
- To keep your mouth shut.
I'd say it was worth
me not throwing you
into the deep end of the pond
and holding you under.
- Adrien.
- Fine.
I really don't care
what you do to me.
or you Miss la dee da.
- Oi.
you dare speak to her like that?
- Johanna.
- Dad. Dad. Louise and
Adrien are getting married.
Dad. where are you?
They're getting married. Dad.
- What's she
got to be upset about?
- She thinks she's losing you.
- She shouldn't be here.
- We brought the
hay down. Leonard.
I was glad of the help.
- She's not going anywhere.
- Adrien. don't make a fuss.
- This is not the time.
She should be at
home with her family.
- We're her family.
You are her family.
- Oh. my God.
- Wait. wait. wait. wait.
- Dad!
- Let her go.
- No.
- No. no. no. Dad.
- Let her go.
you're scaring her.
Will you tell your soldier to
let go of my daughter. please?
- We are not here to
hurt you or your family.
- No. stop.
- It's okay.
- They're hurting me.
- Let her come to me.
- Is this your farm?
- Yes. it is.
- It's very nice.
How big is it?
- Johanna be calm.
- They're hurting me.
- Be calm.
- We will only take
what we need.
My men need water and supplies.
- On second thought.
I think I might slaughter
to one of your pigs.
And I'll take your horse.
- I can't let you do that.
- You want your children
to grow up fatherless. huh?
Huh?
- No. no.
- Please.
- Laurentz.
lower your gun.
- You know. maybe. just maybe.
I might take the girl. huh.
- No. no.
- Ya.
- No. no. no.
- Come here.
Come here!
- In God's name. why?
- ]Maximilian] Get off him.
- Adrien.
- No.
- Don't do this.
- I'm sorry.
He's young.
- Adrien.
- It's fine.
No! No!
No! Dad! No!
No.
No. Adrien!
- Die. now!
- Shh. shh. shh. shh. shh.
Quiet.
We need to be quiet.
Shh.
- You want to play with me. huh?
- Lieutenant.
stand down.
Stand down. Lieutenant.
- Ya. ya I stand down.
- Run.
Just go.
- Run. run.
- Move.
- Sir.
- Have you lost your mind?
- He
almost broke my nose.
- And the girl?
- She was a mistake.
- What happened to you Laurentz?
How did you become
such a monster?
- I am not a monster.
I am a soldier. ya.
- I always knew that
you were capable
of something like this.
I'd hoped you'd prove me wrong.
I thought I could protect
you from yourself.
- Sir. I don't--
- When we reach Reims.
you will be relieved
of your command.
- Father.
- I will spare you
the humiliation
of a court martial
by allowing you to
resign your commission.
- You know you are a
sentimental old fool
and you are going to
get us all killed.
- And you shame our country.
And you shame our family.
- Shh. shh. shh. shh. shh.
- Leonard. are
you all right?
What's happened?
- Leonard.
What happened?
- They killed my son
and then they. they
killed my daughter.
They shot them in front of me.
I did nothing.
- Where's Louise?
- Give him a minute.
- Was she with you?
- Harold.
- Where is she?
- For God's sake.
- Tell me where is she?
- I don't know. she's--
- Leonard. where are they?
Where are the Germans?
- I don't know.
- They killed Adrien
and his sister.
- Harold. Louise. where is she?
- Listen. I'm going to find her.
Go back inside.
Lock the doors.
Don't let anyone
in until I'm back.
- Please.
- No. no!
- Turn the engine off.
Now show me your hands.
Show me your hands.
- I'm unarmed.
- Where have you come from?
- From the village.
I need to find my daughter.
- Are there soldiers
in the village?
- No.
Sir. I--
- We will escort you back.
- I need to find--
- Going to drive us
into the town. ya.
And you're not
going to say a word.
- Hey. hey. Johanna.
Hey. hey. it's all right.
It's all right. it's all right.
It's all right.
She's alive.
Hey Louise. she's alive.
Hey. come on. come on.
Okay Louise. we need to
get her to your father.
Okay. come on. come on.
It's all right. it's all right.
you're gonna be all right.
Come on.
- They're lying where they fell.
- We'll go back and bury
them when all this is over.
- Ah.
- We're running out of time.
We have to get the
people to safety.
- They won't bother us.
We're civilians.
- We can fight them.
- No.
No. we can't risk anymore lives.
Leonard.
- Shouldn't
we hide in the fields.
isn't that the safest place?
- We won't.
- They're not going
to do anything.
They want water and
food and that's it.
- We should defend our homes.
If we're gonna die. we might
as well die with honor.
- Nobody's going to die.
- Well. I've already died.
They're heavily armed.
they don't care.
Believe me. Nicolas. more
people are gonna die.
- Well. you can
hide all you want.
but I'm gonna fight.
- With what. your
butchers knives?
A few old guns?
Follow me.
- Hey. what's going on?
- The bloody bastards
are on their way.
- We're going to a safe
place. come with us.
- I can't leave my
mother. she's too ill.
- Well lock your door.
barricade yourself in.
Have you got a gun?
- Yes. I have.
- Follow us.
Everyone follow us.
- This way.
Come through. come.
- Now. come on.
Come on. get you all in.
Come on.
Yeah. come on.
Peter.
All right.
You go down. Leonard.
- You're not coming with us?
- No. I'll stay in the
church just in case
there are any stragglers.
And I'll follow you down there.
You be strong. Leonard.
Hmm.
- Shh. shh. shh. shh.
shh.
Shh. shh. shh. shh. shh. shh.
How long will you
have to stay here?
- I don't know.
- Louise.
It's okay. it's all
right. it's all right.
It's gonna be all right.
What's wrong?
- It's.
it's my father.
- Someone
told them we were coming.
- Sir. it wasn't me.
- We know.
No need to be afraid
there. Doctor.
- If there are any
franc-tireurs out there.
you'll be the first to know. ya.
- They are peaceful and unarmed.
They are only civilians.
- Shh. shh. shh. shh.
- Shh.
- Get out.
- Exit the car.
Get out.
- Schultz. put a
man on each corner.
Do it now.
Now.
- Let's keep an
eye out for franc-tireurs.
One man on each corner.
Let's go.
Let's keep an eye out
for franc-tireurs.
- I'm sorry.
But we own your car now.
Where can we get more fuel?
Laurentz. go with him.
- Now.
- And take
Schultz with you.
- Let him go.
- Put the gun down.
Brigitte. for God's sake.
Put the gun down.
- I mean her no harm.
- Where is my daughter?
- Put the gun down.
- I mean your husband no harm.
- Brigitte.
- It's a
trap. it's a trap.
- No.
No.
- You led us into a trap.
- No.
- You're part of
the resistance. no?
- I had to talk to her.
- What is going on?
Where's Schultz?
- Leave it.
father. this one is mine.
- Stop.
Please.
Stop.
My son.
There is no need for
any more killing.
- Tell me who the leader of
the resistance is and I won't.
- This is a village.
No one here will harm you.
- Laurentz.
please stop now.
- There is no
resistance. Laurentz.
Everything is all right.
There is no resistance.
- Who is the leader?
You want to die?
- I told you I don't know.
Please.
- I need a name.
Give me a name.
- I have.
I have a daughter. please. sir.
- Louder.
Give me his name.
- I have a daughter.
- Who?
I will ask you one more time.
Give the name.
- Lambert.
- Louder.
- Lambert the farmer.
- Shh.
shh. shh. shh. shh.
- You two.
and you lot. get out there.
Search every building.
I don't care who you
have to kill to find him.
You just fucking find him.
Because I have nothing to lose
now. don't I. father?
Huh?
- Shh. shh. shh. shh.
- Hush up.
- Leonard.
- They don't know the town.
We'll keep them busy
until it gets dark.
That won't be long.
Stand your ground. old man.
Are you ready?
We'll split when we get outside.
Don't make a sound
until we get back.
- Hey.
Open up!
There he is!
- Halt!
- Get him.
- In the window.
- God.
- No. not now.
Not now.
- Weber.
red door. second floor.
Take cover. father.
- We are leaving.
- We're not leaving
until I have the farmer.
Shit.
- I'm not gonna let
my men be picked off
like fish in a barrel.
- Father!
- Listen to me. for once!
- This is unacceptable.
- Are you raising your
weapon on me. son?
- Dad.
- No.
- Down.
Down.
- Louise.
Louise.
- I had a chance to tell her
and I didn't.
- She's gonna
be all right.
Didn't hit anything vital.
The bleeding's stopped for now.
- Johanna.
It's me.
it's Papa.
- Where have you been?
- I've been at grandpa
and grandma's house.
- Was Mom there?
- She was.
Mom was there.
We have to leave.
- Come on.
- I can walk.
- Louise. I need you to grab
whatever medical supplies
you can find.
- Food and water.
Anything we can carry.
- Yeah.
- We'll go by the river.
- The trees will
give us cover.
- There are people
in the church.
- Leonard. the bigger
the number. the bigger the risk.
- They're coming with us.
- Oh God bless his soul.
They've got Enzo.
- Someone's coming.
- Is everyone ready?
- Johanna.
- She's one of Father
Michael's miracles.
- Okay. look. we're
going to France.
We'll be safe.
- We know a route.
- We'll be sitting
ducks out there.
- If you stay here.
you're as good as dead.
- Okay. look. we
need to move now.
Okay. come on. come on.
- Are you not coming?
- This is our home. Leonard.
We stay.
- Go. go. go. go.
- We
mean no harm. sir.
- Ya. ya.
put it down.
Where's the farmer?
- Which farmer?
There are many. sir.
- Where is he?
- We don't know.
- Where's the farmer?
- France.
They are heading for France.
- Please. please!
Please don't! Don't!
Please don't.
- Sir.
the farmer is
heading for France.
- Do you want to follow him?
- Of course.
- Our orders are
to rejoin the battalion.
- You want to explain
to Schultz's father.
why you did not go
after his killer. hm?
- He was killed by
the doctor's wife.
- The farmer is responsible
for all of this.
You know that.
- This man and his people.
we will deal with them.
We will. not you.
Do you understand?
- Perfectly.
- Whatever happens.
you will be resigning
your commission.
- As you wish. father.
- I'm sorry.
- What for?
- Should have taken more walks.
I should have done more.
- Hey. there's plenty of
time for that.
- You just squeeze my hand.
- Oh God gave us his
spirit not of fear.
but of power. love
and self-control.
- You keep it.
I should have seen this coming.
All of it.
- There's no shame in it.
- I just feel so foolish.
- A fool that kept
the three of us safe.
My fool.
- We've gotta get
her to a hospital.
- We'll rest here tonight.
- Oh get off. I can't breathe!
- Who are you?
Why are you spying on us?
- Answer the question. boy.
- I was just hungry.
I was looking for food.
- The rifle?
- I'm on the run from
the Germans. please.
They killed my parents.
Killed my parents.
- Come on.
We're heading for
the French border.
You can come with us.
- Are you with the resistance?
- No. no. I'm just a farmer.
- Where did you get this?
- This is Adrien's.
That's my son's.
- The Germans were
fighting East of here.
I passed a cart
looking for some food.
not far from their camp.
the shotgun was in the back.
- My horse and cart too.
I'm going after them.
- You know you can't.
- Quicker. we get to France.
the better Johanna's
chances are.
The horse and cart
will halve our journey time.
- They're heavily armed.
- They're busy trying
not to get slaughtered.
This is our best chance.
I'll leave at the crack of dawn.
Will you stay with us?
- Yes.
My name's Leonard.
This is my daughter. Louise.
I wanted to thank you
for saving Johanna.
- It was Fergal.
I was just there.
- No. no. you were
more than that.
You were brave.
You were compassionate.
You did it because
you love my son.
- I did.
Very much.
I just wish my parents knew.
It's all my fault.
I should have--
- No. you did everything right.
They'd be proud to see
you being so brave.
I was proud of you.
Had you thought of a name?
- Yeah.
We did.
If it's a girl.
your wife's name. Elise.
If it's a boy.
I want to call him Adrien.
Do you think we can make it?
- We have to.
For ourselves and for them.
- You're daydreaming.
- All this bloodshed.
yet... still nature
stays indifferent.
You look up and you
see it clear as sky.
so... infinitely distant
from earthly life.
You look down and you see the
world tearing itself apart.
We put all our love and hope
in this... fragile. miracle
of life. for what?
- Look.
- No. Leonard.
- For them to
go off to fight
and die from a stray bullet
in someone else's war.
- I don't want to fight.
I want to grow old.
Live in peace.
- But you can live in peace
if you don't fall
for their lies.
- What lies?
- That we're destined
to hate each other.
To only see the worst
in other people's soul.
- Go on. go!
- Father.
- Maybe that's why that
man let Leonard escape.
So he could do what's right.
- Father!
Father.
No.
- Whoa.
- Are you rested?
- A bit.
But I'm all right.
- How are you?
Are you hurt?
- No. no.
I killed their commander.
The father.
- The son will come after us.
He won't stop.
- We need to keep moving.
You load up the cart.
- Thank you.
Thank you.
- Did you see him?
The man that killed Adrien?
- I did.
- Are you gonna kill him?
- Laurentz.
When did the darkness take you?
Was it the seductive
call of power?
The poison of brutality
seeping into your soul.
You stand before me now my
son. but I do not know you.
That innocent boy with
laughter in his eyes is gone.
Replaced by a hollow
man. consumed by hate.
- We need to stop for a while.
Johanna's wound's opened up.
I think it's the
movement of the cart.
- We're close to
the French border.
What do you think?
A couple of hours?
- About that.
- Then we plow on.
- Why are we waiting?
- Let them get
closer to the border.
Let them think they're safe.
- Leonard.
Leonard.
There's something out there.
- Henri.
- It's them.
They're on the
edge of the forest.
How far to the
French border now?
- An hour. maybe more.
- She's feverish.
She keeps losing consciousness.
- Then we stand and fight.
How much do you
think is in here?
- A hundred liters.
- Unload it.
- Please don't.
- Get Johanna to a
hospital in Paris.
- You should go with them.
Stay with the children.
- Ah. it's me that he wants.
And he'll just keep
coming unless we stop him.
If we don't get to the
French border by sunrise.
you continue without us.
You have to be strong. Louise.
Go. go now.
- Maria.
- Look after our son.
- You better come back.
- Charge!
- Our father who art in heaven.
hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come.
thy will be done on earth.
- This is for you my boy.
- Fire.
- They're coming through.
- Oh shit.
- Fergal.
Don't you die on
me. boy. come on.
Come on.
- Let's go.
- Wait.
Wait.
- Thomas.
Are you all right?
- I'm fine.
I'm fine.
- Where are the others?
- They're coming.
Henri.
He's been shot.
- No!
Henri.
- I told you I'd come back.
- I'd already decided
if you hadn't.
I would have taken care of
Johanna. my little sister.
- Adrien gave his life for
what he believed was right.
That family's worth
fighting for and dying for.
- Hey. is my father safe?
- He is. love.
We all are.
- He was terrified
of disappointing you.
- Disappoint me. how?
He chose you.
- Are you coming?
- In a while.
You go on without me.
I won't be long.
You've come to say goodbye.
I thought you might.
You take care of our boy now.
I'll take care of
our little girl.
You'll always be with me.
Everywhere.